README.md, before:

# enclone

<img align="left" src="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/cf/Construction_workers_not_wearing_fall_protection_equipment.jpg/320px-Construction_workers_not_wearing_fall_protection_equipment.jpg" alt="dangerous constuction zone" title="dangerous construction zone" />

<br>
<br>
<br>

This site is under construction.  Please do not enter unless you have been directed here, and
are wearing proper safety equipment.  

(photo credit: NIOSH/wikipedia)

<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

`enclone` is a computational tool for studying the adaptive immune system in humans and
other vertebrate species.  

It uses data from [10x Genomics](https://www.10xgenomics.com/) which permit the precise
characterization of individual immune cells.

> For the general audience: every time you get sick, your body mounts an immune response involving
> selective amplification of immune cells and mutations within them.
> enclone allows you to see the history of individual immune cells within a 
> biological sample (such as a blood draw or biopsy): how they evolved in response to antigens, 
> including those in viruses, bacteria and tumors.  Understanding this is a highly active 
> research area with many mysteries that will take years if not decades to fully sort out, with 
> profound implications for biology and medicine.  Welcome to the frontier!

`enclone` and this page are designed for immunologists, but if
you're simply curious, there's nothing to stop you from downloading and playing with it.

The mission of `enclone` is to:

**Find and display the clonotypes within single cell VDJ datasets:
groups of T and B cells having the same fully rearranged common ancestor.**

The following diagram shows what a _clonotype_ is for B cells.  The same applies for T cells,
but things are simpler because T cells do not have somatic hypermutation.

<img src="img/what_is_a_clonotype.png" alt="what is a clonotype" title="what is a clonotype" />

Each cell in a clonotype is typically represented by two or three chains.  Such information can
only be obtained from _single cell_ data!  From such data, clonotypes can be computationally
approximated, with high accuracy.  The method we use for this is described briefly in the online
documentation for `enclone`, and will be described separately in more detail.
___________________________________________________________________________________________________

### The `enclone` software

`enclone` is open-source, beta software.  Binary executables for Linux and Mac can be 
directly downloaded from this page, as can sample 10x Genomics datasets.  And then you're off and
running!  To use `enclone`, you need to know how to run command-line tools.  This is something that 
can be learned easily, particularly if you have a friend or colleague who can help you
get started.  You do not need to be able to program, or anything of that sort.

`enclone` is fast, typically responding in seconds (if run on a single dataset).  It is intended 
as an experimental tool.  You can dynamically change your command line to select specific 
clonotypes and fields you wish to see.  You can run `enclone` on a laptop or a desktop or a server.

`enclone` is part of the [10x Genomics](https://www.10xgenomics.com/) immune 
profiling toolkit, including
[Cell Ranger and Loupe](https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/software/overview/welcome), 
with which `enclone` will be integrated (later).
___________________________________________________________________________________________________

<a name="download" style="display:block; position:relative; top:-150px;"></a>
### How to download and install `enclone` and get test datasets

<b>(these instructions are not yet functional)</b>

<b>1.  Open terminal window.</b>  Open a terminal window on your Linux or Mac computer. Please let us
know if availability on other platforms is important to you.

<b>2.  Download enclone.</b>  Type the following to download the `enclone` executable:
```
mkdir -p ~/bin; cd ~/bin
wget https://github.com/10XDev/enclone/releases/download/latest/linux/enclone
or on a mac
wget https://github.com/10XDev/enclone/releases/download/latest/mac/enclone
```
This gets you the absolute latest version of `enclone`.  You can repeat this step if you ever
want to update.  At a later date, there will also be separately numbered releases that have passed 
a more extensive set of tests.

<b>3.  Download test data.</b>  Type the following to download the `enclone` test datasets 
(and the source code, but you probably won't need that):
```
cd
git clone git@github.com:10XDev/enclone.git
```
At this point `~/enclone/datasets` will contain the datasets
that are prepackaged with `enclone`.  If you subsequently want to update this, do
```
cd ~/enclone
git pull
```
This assumes that you have not touched the repo since you first cloned it.  Otherwise you should
`git checkout master` first.

<b>4.  Update your path.</b>  Edit your shell initialization file to add `:~/bin` to `PATH`.  Ask a colleague for help
if needed.  Close and reopen your terminal window to refresh your path.  Then you're good to go!
___________________________________________________________________________________________________

### How to run `enclone`

Running `enclone` can be as simple as typing e.g. `enclone BCR=/home/my_name/experiment_123`
where the path is where your Cell Ranger outputs live, but there are many options to learn
about.  For example, if you want to combine many datasets, you can do that, but you probably
need to provide a metadata file that describes the datasets.  You can find most of the `enclone`
documentation within its online menus.  To get started you should:

1. Type `enclone help`, to make sure your terminal window works for `enclone`.

2. Type `enclone` to get to the main `enclone` help menu.
___________________________________________________________________________________________________

### How to understand `enclone` output

The example below shows how `enclone` prints out clonotypes.  This is something you'll need
to study in order to use `enclone` successfully.  `enclone` comes with extensive online 
documentation, and because you can easily play with the sample datasets, you can gradually
figure out how it all works.

<img src="img/enclone_annotated_example.svg" alt="enclone annotated example" title="enclone annotated example" /> By default, `enclone` prints clonotypes in this human-readable form.  You can also instruct
`enclone` to print clonotypes in machine-readable forms that are suitable for input to other
programs.

We are greatly interested in your feedback and ideas you may have to make `enclone` as useful
as possible.  You can write to us at enclone@10xgenomics.com.
___________________________________________________________________________________________________

<a name="honeycomb" style="display:block; position:relative; top:-150px;"></a>
### How to display clonotypes produced by `enclone`

<img align="left" src="img/clono.svg" alt="honeycomb plot" title="honeycomb plot" />

<br>

You can select clonotypes in `enclone` and then display them using a "honeycomb" plot.

In this instance, datasets from pre- and post-vaccination timepoints are displayed.  Clonotypes 
containing at least ten cells are shown.  The plot was generated by adding
```
MIN_CELLS=10 PLOT="clono.svg,pre->blue,post->red 
LEGEND=blue,"pre-vaccination cell",red,"post-vaccination cell"
```
to the `enclone` command line.  That caused `enclone` to generate the image as the file `clono.svg`.

<br><br><br><br><br><br>
___________________________________________________________________________________________________

### The `enclone` manual

`enclone` has about 25 online help pages.  The concatenation of all these help pages is
[here](https://htmlpreview.github.io/?https://github.com/10XGenomics/enclone/blob/master/src/help.all.html) 
<b>[BROKEN LINK]</b>.  
We may expand this out in the future to show the separate pages.

___________________________________________________________________________________________________

### How to compile the `enclone` software

It is not difficult but you should not need to do this unless you want to contribute
to the `enclone` codebase.  Please see [compilation](COMPILE.md).

___________________________________________________________________________________________________

### Questions

Please write to us at enclone@10xgenomics.com.  Please note that `enclone` is beta software
and that we may not be able to answer your question.

Commit message:

explain where data in the example come from

README.md, after:

# enclone

<img align="left" src="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/cf/Construction_workers_not_wearing_fall_protection_equipment.jpg/320px-Construction_workers_not_wearing_fall_protection_equipment.jpg" alt="dangerous constuction zone" title="dangerous construction zone" />

<br>
<br>
<br>

This site is under construction.  Please do not enter unless you have been directed here, and
are wearing proper safety equipment.  

(photo credit: NIOSH/wikipedia)

<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

`enclone` is a computational tool for studying the adaptive immune system in humans and
other vertebrate species.  

It uses data from [10x Genomics](https://www.10xgenomics.com/) which permit the precise
characterization of individual immune cells.

> For the general audience: every time you get sick, your body mounts an immune response involving
> selective amplification of immune cells and mutations within them.
> enclone allows you to see the history of individual immune cells within a 
> biological sample (such as a blood draw or biopsy): how they evolved in response to antigens, 
> including those in viruses, bacteria and tumors.  Understanding this is a highly active 
> research area with many mysteries that will take years if not decades to fully sort out, with 
> profound implications for biology and medicine.  Welcome to the frontier!

`enclone` and this page are designed for immunologists, but if
you're simply curious, there's nothing to stop you from downloading and playing with it.

The mission of `enclone` is to:

**Find and display the clonotypes within single cell VDJ datasets:
groups of T and B cells having the same fully rearranged common ancestor.**

The following diagram shows what a _clonotype_ is for B cells.  The same applies for T cells,
but things are simpler because T cells do not have somatic hypermutation.

<img src="img/what_is_a_clonotype.png" alt="what is a clonotype" title="what is a clonotype" />

Each cell in a clonotype is typically represented by two or three chains.  Such information can
only be obtained from _single cell_ data!  From such data, clonotypes can be computationally
approximated, with high accuracy.  The method we use for this is described briefly in the online
documentation for `enclone`, and will be described separately in more detail.
___________________________________________________________________________________________________

### The `enclone` software

`enclone` is open-source, beta software.  Binary executables for Linux and Mac can be 
directly downloaded from this page, as can sample 10x Genomics datasets.  And then you're off and
running!  To use `enclone`, you need to know how to run command-line tools.  This is something that 
can be learned easily, particularly if you have a friend or colleague who can help you
get started.  You do not need to be able to program, or anything of that sort.

`enclone` is fast, typically responding in seconds (if run on a single dataset).  It is intended 
as an experimental tool.  You can dynamically change your command line to select specific 
clonotypes and fields you wish to see.  You can run `enclone` on a laptop or a desktop or a server.

`enclone` is part of the [10x Genomics](https://www.10xgenomics.com/) immune 
profiling toolkit, including
[Cell Ranger and Loupe](https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/software/overview/welcome), 
with which `enclone` will be integrated (later).
___________________________________________________________________________________________________

<a name="download" style="display:block; position:relative; top:-150px;"></a>
### How to download and install `enclone` and get test datasets

<b>(these instructions are not yet functional)</b>

<b>1.  Open terminal window.</b>  Open a terminal window on your Linux or Mac computer. Please let us
know if availability on other platforms is important to you.

<b>2.  Download enclone.</b>  Type the following to download the `enclone` executable:
```
mkdir -p ~/bin; cd ~/bin
wget https://github.com/10XDev/enclone/releases/download/latest/linux/enclone
or on a mac
wget https://github.com/10XDev/enclone/releases/download/latest/mac/enclone
```
This gets you the absolute latest version of `enclone`.  You can repeat this step if you ever
want to update.  At a later date, there will also be separately numbered releases that have passed 
a more extensive set of tests.

<b>3.  Download test data.</b>  Type the following to download the `enclone` test datasets 
(and the source code, but you probably won't need that):
```
cd
git clone git@github.com:10XDev/enclone.git
```
At this point `~/enclone/datasets` will contain the datasets
that are prepackaged with `enclone`.  If you subsequently want to update this, do
```
cd ~/enclone
git pull
```
This assumes that you have not touched the repo since you first cloned it.  Otherwise you should
`git checkout master` first.

<b>4.  Update your path.</b>  Edit your shell initialization file to add `:~/bin` to `PATH`.  Ask a colleague for help
if needed.  Close and reopen your terminal window to refresh your path.  Then you're good to go!
___________________________________________________________________________________________________

### How to run `enclone`

Running `enclone` can be as simple as typing e.g. `enclone BCR=/home/my_name/experiment_123`
where the path is where your Cell Ranger outputs live, but there are many options to learn
about.  For example, if you want to combine many datasets, you can do that, but you probably
need to provide a metadata file that describes the datasets.  You can find most of the `enclone`
documentation within its online menus.  To get started you should:

1. Type `enclone help`, to make sure your terminal window works for `enclone`.

2. Type `enclone` to get to the main `enclone` help menu.
___________________________________________________________________________________________________

### How to understand `enclone` output

The example below shows how `enclone` prints out clonotypes.  This is something you'll need
to study in order to use `enclone` successfully.  `enclone` comes with extensive online 
documentation, and because you can easily play with the sample datasets, you can gradually
figure out how it all works.

<img src="img/enclone_annotated_example.svg" alt="enclone annotated example" title="enclone annotated example" /> 

This exact output would be obtained by typing
```
enclone PRE=~/enclone/datasets BCR=123085
```
provided that you put test data in the location indicated under download instructions.  Otherwise
you would need to change the value of `PRE`.  The directory `123085` is in the directory
`~/enclone/datasets` and consists of some files from a Cell Ranger run, obtained from a human 
ovarian cancer sample.

By default, `enclone` prints clonotypes in this human-readable form.  You can also instruct
`enclone` to print clonotypes in machine-readable forms that are suitable for input to other
programs.

We are greatly interested in your feedback and ideas you may have to make `enclone` as useful
as possible.  You can write to us at enclone@10xgenomics.com.
___________________________________________________________________________________________________

<a name="honeycomb" style="display:block; position:relative; top:-150px;"></a>
### How to display clonotypes produced by `enclone`

<img align="left" src="img/clono.svg" alt="honeycomb plot" title="honeycomb plot" />

<br>

You can select clonotypes in `enclone` and then display them using a "honeycomb" plot.

In this instance, datasets from pre- and post-vaccination timepoints are displayed.  Clonotypes 
containing at least ten cells are shown.  The plot was generated by adding
```
MIN_CELLS=10 PLOT="clono.svg,pre->blue,post->red 
LEGEND=blue,"pre-vaccination cell",red,"post-vaccination cell"
```
to the `enclone` command line.  That caused `enclone` to generate the image as the file `clono.svg`.

<br><br><br><br><br><br>
___________________________________________________________________________________________________

### The `enclone` manual

`enclone` has about 25 online help pages.  The concatenation of all these help pages is
[here](https://htmlpreview.github.io/?https://github.com/10XGenomics/enclone/blob/master/src/help.all.html) 
<b>[BROKEN LINK]</b>.  
We may expand this out in the future to show the separate pages.

___________________________________________________________________________________________________

### How to compile the `enclone` software

It is not difficult but you should not need to do this unless you want to contribute
to the `enclone` codebase.  Please see [compilation](COMPILE.md).

___________________________________________________________________________________________________

### Questions

Please write to us at enclone@10xgenomics.com.  Please note that `enclone` is beta software
and that we may not be able to answer your question.
